# JWT authentication using Flask
An application to secure a Flask REST API using JWT authentication

## Running the App:
1. Clone the repository
2. Create a virtual environment `py -m venv .venv`
3. Run the virtual environment profile `source .venv/Scripts/activate`
4. Install the dependencies `pip install -r requirements.txt`
5. Create the database and models:
    ```
        $ python
        >>> from app import app, db
        >>> with app.app_context():
        >>>     db.create_all()
    ```
6. Start the app `py app.py` or `flask --app app run --debug`

## General Info:
```
# create a virtual environment profile int he backend folder
py -m venv .venv
```

```
# run the virtual environment profile
source .venv/Scripts/activate
```

```
# install dependencies
pip install Flask PyJWT Flask_SQLAlChemy
```

```
# show installed packages
pip freeze

# save installed packages in the requirements folder
pip freeze > requirements.txt

# to install dependencies in the requirements.txt
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

```
# run the below commands to create sqlite3 database and model tables
$ python
>>> from app import app, db
>>> with app.app_context():
>>>     db.create_all()
```

```
# start the app by running the commands int he project folder
source .venv/Scripts/activate
py app.py
```

```
# Flask app can be started by running the below command without the need for app.run:
flask --app app run --debug

# or by adding app.run and then:
py app.py
```

```
# Hash passwords using bcrypt
pip install Flask-Bcrypt
```

### Marshmallow and SQLAlchemy
- Marshmallow “converts” (deserializes) dicts to SQLAlchemy models or serializes SQLAlchemy models to dicts.
- SQLAlchemy is an ORM. It maps database schema (tables) and data to Python objects.
- The two packages complement each other. They cannot and do not replace each others’ functionality.
- Flask-Marshmallow gives you a convenient interface to Marshmallow under Flask.
- They are regarded as one of the best packages to use for the problems they solve.

### In short, marshmallow schemas can be used to:
- Validate input data.
- Deserialize input data to app-level objects.
- Serialize app-level objects to primitive Python types. The serialized objects can then be rendered to standard formats such as JSON for use in an HTTP API.

### JWT
- An authentication mechanism used to securely transmit information between a client and a server in JSON format.
- This information can be verified and trusted because it is digitally signed with the HMAC algorithm or a public/private key pair using RSA or ECDSA.
- The tokens are encoded into three parts, each divided by a period, like this `Header.Payload.Signature`
    - Header: This defines the type of token (JWT) and the signing algorithm used.
    - Payload: This carries user-specific data like user ID, username, roles, and any additional claims you want to include. This payload is encoded in Base64 for maximum security.
    - Signature: This is a hashed combination of the header, the payload, and the server's secret key. It ensures the token's integrity and that any modifications to the token will be detected.
- JWT acts as a stateless means of transmitting data from a client to a server. It doesn't store any session object in the browser, so the browser doesn't maintain a session state between requests.
- How JWT works:
    - A user attempts to log in and sends a username and password to be verified by the server.
    - The verification function carries out a check to see if there's a match in the database.
    - A JWT is then generated by the server once the user is successfully authenticated (logged in) using their information (payload), such as user ID or username, and signs it using a secret key.
    - The generated JWT is sent along as a bearer token with every request header to check if the user is authenticated to make that request.
